Journal Notes - Gender and Identity in the Middle East and Africa


Benstead, Lindsay, Amaney Jamal, and Ellen Lust. 2015. “Is it Gender, Religiosity, or Both? A Role Congruity Theory of Cqndidate Electability in Transitional Tunisia.” Perspectives on Politics 13(1): 74-94

Women's rights a key concern in the Arab World, with bad futures possible. Bias against women in politics is nearly universal around world, but persistent in Arab context

Role contiguity a key aspect of women's issues globally, specifically the roles people assume women are suited for. Candidates often assumed to need to reflect characteristics ascribed to good leaders

Gap exists between stereotypes and perceptions of need for women's leadership, with typical assumption of women as caretakers conflicting with assumptions of leadership

Males tend to be more biased, but those who have experienced female leadership tend to be less so. Stereotypes remain persistent, tied to unique local/regional histories

A survey experiment using photos and a basic query allows for tractable assessment of basic research question, examining signaling effects taking place between interviewer and respondent

Modernization theory expects that support for female leadership tied to economics/education, while social identity theory suggests that group bias will drive responses

Role contigruity theory expects outcomes to be based on assumptions of prospective leader's matching certain expected characteristics of good leadership, as locally constructed

Results indicate voters tend to reward those who look like a leader, confirming congruity hypothesis, while modernization not supported and social identity effect present as anticipated

While the focus here is on Tunisia, results are generalizable and robust. Males tend to be seen as leaders more than women, but education/exposure does affect results


Benstead, Lindsay J. 2014a. “Effects of Interviewer-Respondent Gender Interaction on Attitudes toward Women and Politics: Findings from Morocco.” International Journal of Public Opinion Research 26(3): 369-383. doi: 10.1093/ijpor/edt024.

Research on womens rights possibly affected by interviewer-respondent bias effects, where respondents condition answers on the interviewer's characteristics

Arab world is strongly patriarchial and bias should show strongly in area if anywhere. Also a good place to test interaction of social desirability bias and power relations

Social desirability effect suggests that respondents self-censor to self-protect where expressing certain views might lead to repercussions, so power relations important

Sample in Morocco used multi-stage probability model powered by direct interviews, reliable results incorporate interaction effects and non-response bias

Logistic regression applied to examine non-responses, which demonstrated a clear pattern of respondents avoiding transgressing common social norms

Males tend to reduce social distance to interviewers, so they respond differently to male and female interviewers, where women tend to have higher non-response rates

Power relations within society likely play key role, so it is necessary in this type of research to incorporate procedures to counter expected effects


Berge, Erling, Daimon Kambewa, Alister Munthali, and Henrik Wiig. 2014. “Lineage and Land Reforms in Malawi: Do Matrilineal and Patrilineal Landholding Systems Represent a Problem for Land Reforms in Malawi?” Land Use Policy 41: 61-69. doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2014.05.003

Customary Landholding systems pose challenges for land reform policy, as they can contribute to insecure tenure, producing reform demands, but are resistant to change

Malawi commonly sees matrilineal landholding in central and southern regions, with Chewa, Lomwe, Yao, Ngoni, and Nyania key matrilineal tribal groupings

Land reform typically seeks to redistribute land to landless, with goal of increasing social productivity and improving land tenure security

Culture is a key determinant to landholding systems around world, with matriarchial systems uncommon but still present in parts of Africa, though it remains under-studied

Land scarcity produces a greater emphasis on tenure security, and serves as a source for conflict as locals try to adjudicate disputes using different institutional routes

Increased population density creates pressure for subdivision, and raises stakes overall, also leading to a large population movement of landless to cities

Women's traditional tenure arrangements can be impacted by reforms that tend to take the male perspective and target landholders for redistribution to often male beneficiaries


Chinsinga, Blessings. 2011. “The Politics of Land Reforms in Malawi: The case of the Community based Rural Development Programme.” Journal of International Development 23 (3): 380–393. DOI: 10.1002/jid.1776.

Politics of land reform is often fraught, with pro-poor policies hard to effectively implement, and isn't a simple technical problem but deeply and intensely political

In Malawi, a program called Community Based Rural Land Development Program [CBRLDP] has attempted to redress chronic issues in rural landholding

Stakeholders however are actively engaged in evading reforms that harm their interests, and often use informal institutions to their advantage where they are able

Existing communities often oppose the land rights of newcomers, which creates a major point of contention that undermines the CBRLDP in Malawi

Elites have moved to thoroughly game the CBRLDP institutions and traditional routes, and often use market reforms to further write in control and protection of own interests

In Malawi this capture of institutions has progressed to the point that CBRLDP likely needs to be abandoned as counter-productive to its intended goals


Bush, Sarah S., and Jamal A. Amaney. 2015. “Anti-Americanism, Authoritarian Politics, and  Attitudes about Women's Representation: Evidence from a Survey Experiment in  Jordan.” International Studies Quarterly 59 (1): 34–45. DOI: 10.1111/isqu.12139

Authors seek to answer two questions: Does US support for womens rights undermine public support in Arab world, and does domestic support for policy reform work better with local attitudes?

Unexpected findings: Support has no effect whether it comes internally or externally, rather, what is decisive is whether support is pro or anti regime, and the orientation of the audience

Disposition towards incumbent regime is more important than source of support, and those opposing regime oppose support regardless of who is giving it

A signaling effect is present, where support for a specific regime policy is taken as support for regime, and orientation towards regime controls perception of the signal

Authoritarian regimes tend to restrict speech, creating a public information-poor environment, which makes the few signals available all the more important and relevant

State-level of analysis normal in democracy promotion debate, but individual level effects are important for understanding how different groups conduct/experience politics

Citizens tend to listen to elite opinions from their own partisan position, which in authoritarian regime is tied to support for regime. Foreign endorsements fall into same dynamic

Assessment of survey respondents in Jordan bears out this pattern, with US and local support for women's rights policy perceived locally according to individual view on regime itself

In general, results support view of foreign endorsements having a polarizing effect on domestic politics, but the key factor is whether endorsement is pro or anti regime


Bush, Sarah S. 2011. “International Politics and the Spread of Quotas for Women in Legislatures.” International Organization 65 (1): 103-137.

Quotas for womens representation in government now internationally widespread, but often deployed in places where women suffer from relatively low status, not in developed countries

Diffusion of the quota-norm has spread via international organizations along two causal paths: Direct as a result of peacekeeping efforts, indirect by connecting aid to adoption

Now this norm is a major component of international democracy promotion, essentially operating by mandating a fixed quantity of seats for gender groups, usually women

Development, democracy, higher income, and secularism all a factor in adoption, but divergence between the developed and developing world due to exposure to international groups and their norms

Author argues that establishing international norms creates domestic incentivs, and accepting quotas signals willingness to accept norm

Shared belief systems develop on the back of norm acceptance via process of establishing quota rules, and both sides come to perceive such quotas as normal given reasonable success


Duflo, Esther. 2012. "Women Empowerment and Economic Development." Journal of Economic Literature 50(4): 1051-79. DOI: 10.1257/jel. 50.4.1051

Women in much of the developing world experience high mortality and lack of opportunties, with labor markets, legal regimes, and politics all playing a role in situation

Development and Empowerment can go together, and are often assumed to be mutually-reinforcing, but typically only one or other is focus of research and analysis

Poverty causes under-investment in girls, and associated lack of education leads to vicious cycle across generations, so development can play direct role in improving outcomes

Women Empowerment mitigates lack of representation in politics, and can improve poor womens' property rights. Female leaders seem to improve outcomes for other women

But assumptions that this relationship is guaranteed are not necessarily warranted, and women's motivations for participating in development/empowerment often assumed

Reality is more complex, and outcomes more difficult to control, than often assumed, with improved processes and mandated rights needed to tie two together in practice


Htun, Mala, and S. Laurel Weldon. 2010. “When Do Governments Promote Women’s Rights? A Framework for the Comparative Analysis of Sex Equality Policy.” Perspectives on Politics 8(1): 207–216.

Variation in gender related policy globally very high, which shapes women's experiences and services access in much of the world

Too little direct comparative research is done in area, and western focus biases analysis, requiring new theories of change in women's rights to make more progress

Gender equality seeks to dismantly hierarchies of power, with sex equality a narrower category more focused on specific male vs. female outcomes

Framework proposed: different categories with different gender response, with class dimension and gender dimension functioning as two defining parameters for a typology of policies

Doctrinal policy is tied to issues that touch on religious teachings, while Gender policy focuses specifically on women's outcomes

Four types of policy: Doctrinal-Gendered (example: legality of abortion), Doctrinal-nonGendered (Abortion funding), Non-Doctrinal Gendered (Quotas), nonDoctrinal-nonGendered (Parental leave)

Doctrinal authorities typically tie together reproduction-kinship-heritage and claim right to govern women's bodies, while Gender equality promoters focus on women as women

Agent actions are conditioned by context, with different issue types having different regional effects, and state capacity-institutions-vulnerability-democratization playing role

This disaggregation of gendered issues reveals deeper political dynamics at work, with issue type and national polity features constraining political actors and policy uptake


Htun, Mala, and S. Laurel Weldon. 2012. “The Civic Origins of Progressive Policy Change: Combating Violence Against Women in Global Perspective, 1975–2005.” American Political Science Review 106(3): 548–569.

Violence against women is a global problem that defies conceptions of basic human rights, with significant variation in legislative and functional progress around world

Authors use 70-country dataset covering 4 decades to assess variation, and find that autonomous mobilization on feminist lines both domestically and internationally are crucial to progress

Authors created a scored index based on six dimensions of womens rights policy to assess countries: victim services, legal reforms, vulnerability focus, training, prevention, and administration

Focus of index is adopted policies, not enforcement, and is sensitive to variation in quality for each dimension/measure, backed by primary document research across four years

VAW policy naturally progressive and socially-oriented, it has the specific intention of empowerment, and virtually always raised as an issue by feminist groups

Transnational activism is key to the spread of VAW policy, norm promotion presses for a tipping point, which can be followed by change and diffusion of lessons/results

Change occurs because of women's organizing across borders, with a magnifying effect present when domestic movements connect to international movements

Presence of leftist parties, quotas for women, and economics alone do not account for progress, only movements backed by feminist political pressure accomplishes goal


Htun, Mala, and S. Laurel Weldon. 2015. “Religious Power, the State, Women’s Rights, and Family Law.” Politics & Gender 11(3): 451–477.

Family Law is an essential dimension of women's citizenship, as rights in this area shape access to social resources via disposition of property

State-Religion interaction is essential to understanding development of Family Law, especially where religious authority is linked to discriminatory family code

Religions themselves are sites of struggle and contest, doctrine not set in stone, and this conflict spills over into family law

Familes are the basic unit of politics, particularly those sharing household, so family dynamics essential prerequisite for political activity

Four cross-sections pooled with sex equality index as numeric value paired with GLS regression and typical robustness checks create foundation for analysis

Highly devout, state-religion fused societies tend to be hostile to women's rights, with law linked definitively to religion as interpreted by authorities

By no means is this an Islam-only phenomenon, all countries are affected, and it is ultimately the state that makes the choice to ally with religious groups and oppose women's rights policy


Hudson VM, Bowen DL and Nielsen PL. 2015. “Clan governance and state stability: The relationship between female subordination and political order.” American Political Science Review 109(03): 535–555.

Clans, defined effectively as kin groups, are of crucial importance in politics but remain empirically under-studied, despite their influence on political outcomes

Typically clans are patriarchial/patrilineal, and incorporate hierarchy into structure. Justice systems often rely on self-help, with reputation and honor key social ideas

Authors argue that clan based society is usually a "dysfunctional, unstable, insecure, frequently bloody society"

Clans function by exclusion, which relies on control of reproduction, and restricting women's agency through marriage is a fundamental requirement

Authors hypothesis: measures of women's subordination correlate to instability and violence, causal link being a "syndrome of subordination" that reinforces clan exclusivity

Empirics confirm hypothesis, and the idea that clan-based patriarchy is tied to instability

*NOTE: personally disagree with causal argument and view of clans as cultural artifacts, rather than a human universal (though political actualization definitely varies by society)


Kaarhus, R. 2010 Women’s Land Rights and Land Tenure Reforms in Malawi: What Difference Does Matriliny Make? Forum for Deveopment Studies 37(2), 171-192. DOI: 10.1080/08039411003725857

Access to land is essential for women in Malawi, as lack of it is directly tied to vulnerability. Matriliny is present but under threat, it's construction in discourse useful to consider

Matrilineal rules, norms, and practices are tied to descent through mother, a practice often assumed by scholars to be archaic or dying, which affects policy

Original anthropological views discounted matriarchy as obsolete, and early anthropologists' writings deeply influenced colonial management, which likewise ignored women

Often in colonial context male superiority was assumed, and western focus on property rights in male hands proved damaging to women's fortunes

Post-Colonial land tenure reforms have largely carried on basic patriarchial assumptions, and land scarcity is an increasing driver of social conflict and further rights erosion

Males and females tend to benefit differently from reforms, and the evidence indicates that women's rights must be aggressively protected to prevent erosion


Masoud, Tarek, Jamal Amaney, and Elizabeth Nugent. 2016. “Using the Qur’ān to Empower Arab Women? Theory and Experimental Evidence From Egypt.” Comparative Political Studies 49(12): 1555–1598. DOI: 10.1177/0010414015626452

Some scholars and intellectuals have begun to explore the potential for Islam to serve as a vehicle for promoting women's rights, with holy texts offering opportunities in this regard

Women's disempowerment is a global problem, but particularly persistent in Arab/Muslim world, and tied to multiple causes that go beyond culture, economics, or religion

Islamic feminism has been shown in several contexts to be feasible, and this study in Egypt focuses on effect of Islamic discourse on support for women's rights

Experimental design employed to have respondents select one of two responses, one more and one less supportive of a female executive in government

A treatment group was given a statement including an adapted Qur'anic verse, while active controls were read a statement with scientific/scholarly backing

Active controls showed slight boost in support for female executive, but treatment group response far in excess in terms of increased stated support

Further groups created by varying questions and incorporating experimental effects to understand the impact of interviewer-respondent effects

Subsequent logistic regression shows that enumerator gender variable produces robust result, with religious males particularly responsive to religious-dressed females

Education and religiosity have opposite impacts in the anticipated directions, but the heterogeneous treatement effects indicate strong potential for strategic messaging via religious women


Muriaas, Ragnhild L. 2009. “Local perspectives on the ‘neutrality’ of traditional authorities in Malawi, South Africa and Uganda.” Commonwealth & Comparative Politics 47(1): 28–51.

Traditional institutions were revived as sites of legitimate dispute resolution in 1990s, with authorities seen as non-partisan actors

Complex societies existed throughout southern Africa pre-colonialism, some nation-states and some empires, with other smaller independent polities

Colonial occupiers utilized divide-and-rule tactics to prevent opposition, though specifics varied by location and circumstance

Tribal leaders and centralized state comprised two key political poles post-independence, with tribal leaders playing intermediary role between government and locals

This intermediary status allowed them to develop a particular role, but they were typically and remain economically dependent on the central government

Incumbent parties exert pull, expecting tribal authorities 'neutrality' to mean 'regime supporting', forcing tribal leaders to play effective partisan role

Pressure from below also felt as tribal leaders are expected to maintain development aid connections to central government, so forced to be cautious


Peters, P. E. (1997). Against the Odds: matriliny, land and gender in the Shire Highlands of Malawi. Critique of Anthropology, 17(2), 189–210.

Shire highlands in Southern Malawi tend to be matrilineal despite impacts of Christianization, European colonization and settlement, agricultural reforms, and persistent patriarchy

Religious authorities tend to promote patriarchial values, but local practices managed to survive despite decades of colonial and post-colonial patriarchy

Estate system & colonial governments assumed nuclear family ideal, with economic benefits rightfully flowing through men to their families

But this tendency has not completely destroyed prevailing matriliny practices, and cultural practices associated with matriliny remain present in society

Missionary-Colonial-Estate complex of interests have reduced women's scope for action, and shifted formal power into male hands

Land scarcity now straining traditional land tenure systems, creating tension between siblings, but so far this has mostly affected larger communities and groups


Sadiqi, Fatima. 2008. “The Central Role of the Family Law in the Moroccan Feminist Movement.” British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 35(3): 325-337.

Moroccan feminist movement began in 1946 as a shift towards independence began, but differences in male and female feminist ideals present from the beginning

Male feminists were concerned more about international perceptions and modernization than gender per se, but women's activism ensured that their strain survived

Mass education as part of modernization led to increased women's discourse, discussion of life experiences, and ultimately feminist mobilization and contestation in the press and academy

By 21st century, monarchy in Morocco was openly accepting of feminist political arguments, with women's NGOs having become effective sites of autonomous organization

This slow growth in capability has allowed feminist groups to take a role in contesting the Moroccan Family Law regime

Significant challenges remain with men remaining in most positions of power and not all men accepting the legitimacy of feminist discourse/argument


Tessler, Mark, and Ina Warriner. 1997, “Gender, Feminism, and Attitudes toward International Conflict: Exploring Relationships with Survey Data from the Middle East.” World Politics 49(2): 250-281.

Theoretical treatment of gender is gaining traction in international relations, separating male-female biological differences from their socially constructed social roles

Some evidence exists that women are more pacific by nature than men, and in some circles this is bound up with the idea of women as being innately nurturing in life and politics

But overall, evidence remains mixed, and meaning contested. Many feminists [NOTE: myself included!] view 'nurturing tendency' argument misplaced and tied to gendered worldview

Feminism when interacted with nationalism may imply subordination, so to assess the degree to which this is true surveys deployed in Israel, Palestine, Egypt, and Kuwait

Comparative assessment of these cases aided by their very different societies and political regimes, but commonality of existing in the Middle East with religious governments

Support for feminism was tied most strongly, across males and females, to support for compromise in politics and diplomacy, implying nationalist discourse subordination of feminism to the nation


Tiessen, Rebecca. 2008. “Small Victories But Slow Progress: An Examination of Women in Politics in Malawi.” International Feminist Journal of Politics 10(2): 198-215.

Malawi lags behind African neighbors on women's rights issues, mostly in terms of political representation and the legislature in particular

Lack of adoption of a quota system is partly to blame, but other factors include historic sexism, slow contemporary policy progress, and persistent patron-client system

Fear of violence and social exclusion keep many women out of politics, and pervasive view of women not being suited for leadership present in media

Time is also a crucial factor inhibiting greater women's participation in politics, as women's livelihood roles tend to be highly time-intensive

Despite effective double bind, women in Malawi have organized and achieved successes, and capacity development to date allows for greater future efforts


Weldon, Laurel S. and Htun, Mala. 2013. “Feminist Mobilisation and Progressive Policy Change: Why Governments Take Action to Combat Violence Against Women.” Gender & Development 21(2): 231–247.

NOTE: This piece is very similar to Htun & Weldon 2012 (see above). Slight difference in focus, but discussion of same research

VAW measures increasingly driven by national governments, with variation in policy outcomes useful to examine for better understanding of why some countries adopt while others don't

Feminist activism is the most important causal factor, more important than left-wing parties, legislatures with high women's representation, and wealth in the country

Local movements adopt and actualize norms expressed by the international community, and are actually the ones who create on-the-ground success

Conventions and agreements at the international level a useful tool for supporting domestic organization, with regional and global agreements useful


















































