Attitudes about America and Israel Journal Article Notes

Abadi, Jacob. 2007. “The Road to the Israeli-Moroccan Rapprochement.” Journal of North African Studies 5(1): 27-54. https://doi.org/10.1080/13629380008718386.

Morocco and Israel have a moderate, even cordial relationship, in past King Hassan II backed Israel-Arab negotiations and met with Israeli leaders to broker dialogue

Some argue that non-bordering states in Arab world tend to be hostile to Israel because stakes are low, but dissenting rulers still face danger from other Arab rulers

Morocco is in the position of needing foreign investment to survive and develop, and has historically been a reasonably safe home for the local Jewish community

Egypt has kept power from Islamists and experienced violence as a result, but Morocco unites temporal and religious leadership in the King, offering more latitude for adaptation

Morocco has generally benefited from its ties to Israel, despite the opposition to these ties stemming from the Arab League states

Israel-Morocco ties likely to remain strong, as Morocco is caught between the US and Israel in terms of international ties, and they assist regime in maintaining stability


Abadi, Jacob. 2017. “Tunisia and Israel: relations under stress.” Middle Eastern Studies 53(4): 507-532. https://doi.org/10.1080/00263206.2016.1263191.

Tunisia has typically been less hostile to Israel than the rest of the Arab world, but broader Arab opinion shifts, Israel's actions, and collapse of Oso has damaged relations

Economic contacts ultimately underpin Israel-Tunisia relations, but these are being pushed into the background as social tensions rise and attitudes shift

Tunisia has historically been a rival of Egypt for influence in Arab affairs, first dictator post-independence pursued a gradualist approach to shifting ties

Anti-Jewish sentiment is not high among Tunisia's elites, and so far state protection of the local Jewish community has been maintained

Ability to normalize relations with Israel impacted/complicated by the Israel-Palestine conflict, as violence has increased local sentiment has turned against over ties

Regime continues to advocate an Anti-Israel orientation publicly, but privately economic interaction remains high, out of sight of politics


Bamert, Justus, Fabrizio Gilardi, and Fabio Wasserfallen. 2015. "Learning and the diffusion of regime contention in the Arab Spring." Research & Politics 2(3): 1-9. https://doi.org/10.1177/2053168015593306.

Many have argued that in Arab Spring protests rapidly spread between countries, creating narrative of cascade failure affecting regimes in Arab world

This idea requires better testing, to determine if learning is in fact key, and study deploys diadic analysis of 20 MENA countries to examine how protests spread and why

Results indicate successful protests that overthrow regime quickly emulated, but decision to protest biased by cognitive shortcuts, inadequate information about success/failure

Rational learning models predict individuals actively seek out information and behave according to cost/benefit assessment, but this is not apparent here

Bounded learning argues that protestors in this case use heuristic assessments based on limited info, prone to making quick decisions not tied to on-ground realities

Speed of protest diffusion and the socio-political similarities between countries define difference between views, with slow diffusion and sensitivity to context predicted by rational learning

But Bounded learning more useful, protests 10x more likely in week after some other area regime falls, declining over the next month, showing protestors react to successes without long-term planning


Benstead, Lindsay J., and Megan Reif. 2013. “Polarization or pluralism? Language, identity, and attitudes toward Western culture among Algeria’s Youth.” Middle East Journal of Culture and Communication 6: 75-106. doi:10.1163/18739865-00503005.

MENA region often perceived as homogeneous, depite pluralist reality. Cleavages between a number of identity groups present, varying by issue and outlook

Post-colonial Algeria saw Arabization move intended to create new identity, but was contested. Partly because role of language as expression of identity and values

Language use is under-studied in social sciences, but binds to key cleavages. Difficult to study though, as connections between language-culture-politics not straightforward

Discourse is what constructs individual and collective identities, and language is a key component. It is inherited, but shaped by social forces, and bound up with power relations

Anthropologists have 2 major strands of theory on this: sociocultural and symbolic capital, with Bourdieu's writing heavily influencing latter

Sociocultural explanations focus on the environment and inheritance of language, while symbolic capital sees language as strategic asset

Algeria is split between French/Arabic/local (Tamazight) languages, but use overlaps between ethnic/identity groups, and different dynamics associated depending on group and history

Arabic vs. French use is strongly attenuated by sociocultural factors, but French use in particular is associated with higher socioeconomic status

Analytical results show that symbolic capital is as or more important than sociocultural factors in Algeria, with education and policy playing role in structuring opportunities

French speakers have an advantage via educations system as skills are in demand, also scarce and expensive to acquire, creating class/ethnicity dynamic and access questions


Benstead, Lindsay J., and Megan Reif. 2017. “Coke, Pepsi or Mecca Cola? Why product characteristics shape collective action problems and boycott success.” Politics, Groups, and Identities 5(2): 220-241. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/21565503.2015.1084338. First published online in 2015.

Political consumption patterns, like boycotts of products, are a growing area of scholarly interest, but focus is too often on democratic contexts, problems with collective action and material impacts

Authors examine Algerian undergraduates during the Abu Ghraib scandal, evaluating how boycotts affect actual expressed product/brand preferences between US and Islamic world brands

Brand preferences are used as a stand-in for observed behavior, which isn't feasible. Political conditions, availability of substitute products, play key roles in boycott outcome

Developing regions' unique history and relatively weak post-colonial institutions make local boycotts powerful form of expression and protest, a "channel of political expression"

Boycotts are more likely in drone-affected areas, near Israel, or where an external power (usually the US) backs a dictator. Algerians increasingly consume US brands, but also boycott them more

Goods can be assessed by their identity and brand symbolism, as well as the social and brand visibility. Visible US connection, availability of substitutes, impact success/failure

Authors' typology of product classes imply that soda will be most impacted, clothes moderately so, and phones not, and quantitatively assess survey data to evaluate

Findings support the hypothesis: Sodas most affected, due to their known brand origin in the US, availability of substitutes, and the visibility of user consumption of the product


Benstead, Lindsay J. 2014b. “Does Interviewer Religious Dress Affect Survey Responses? Evidence from Morocco.” Politics and Religion 7(4): 734-760. doi: 10.1017/S1755048314000455. 

Observer traits known to impact survey response quality, with increased attention to attitudes in Arab world driving interest and focus

Interviewer dress impacts responses in Morocco, with religious respondents most affectd, supporting a view that power relations theory can usefully explain present survey bias

In a society like Morocco where a secular elite is confronted by rising power of Islamist parties, being religious means being in opposition/vulnerable, and respondents condition answers

Social identity theory proposes in/out dynamics driving this behavior, as dress signals belonging, and behavioral expectations set for an individual by their dress pattern

Intersections of power relations on religious and gender relations creates 4 basic groups, with only 2 examined in this study due to limits

Religiously-sensitive questions used to screen for baseline religiosity, with Sunni Islam dominant in Morocco this screening is fairly straightforward

When interviewed by hijab-wearing female, religious respondents gave different answers than to secular interviewers, implying bias may be widespread in MENA studies

Results also indicate the underlying complexity produced by intersectional effects, where power and religious identity create meaningful groupings

Studies in MENA context need to take into account underlying social-political signaling and shifted responses due to respondent concerns over vulnerability


Blaydes, Lisa and Drew A. Linzer. 2012. “Elite Competition, Religiosity, and Anti-Americanism in the Islamic World.” American Political Science Review 106. doi:10.1017/S0003055412000135.
 
Anti-Americanism is defined as negative views of Americans and/or American culture, and is increasingly studies post 2001, with significant variation in intensity by country

Authors argue that Anti-American attitudes are driven by elites, who manipulate public sentiment and whip up anger to suit their own interests

Intensity of conflict between Islamist and secular national elites key, with elites tending to ramp up Anti-American rhetoric during political contests

American behavior is argued to be relevant insofar as it provides evidence for the assertions about America made by domestic elites

Backlash against US policy/behavior often held up as reason for anti-American attitudes, but authors see elite behavior as decisive in this regard

Authors argue a baseline level of anti-americanism is present in each society, which rises and then recedes back to baseline depending on electoral context

NOTE: There's something off about the author's research design and argument, that I can't quite put my finger on. I *think* the issue stems from their assertion that elites are responsible for provoking anti-american outbursts, and that US actions are only meaningful to the degree they confirm allegations of American misbehavior. I doubt their ability to meaningfully prove this dynamic using this research design. How to determine if elite behavior is responsible for anti-american attitudes, or if elites simply take advantage of a salient "problem" perceived by their citizens.


Corstange, Daniel. 2016. "Anti-American Behavior in the Middle East: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Lebanon." Journal of Politics 78(1): 311-325. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2444102. First published online in 2015.

Anti-American attitudes are widespread in Middle East, but there is scholarly uncertainty over the target of these attitudes: US policy? America itself (Americans)? Are other countries relevant?

Survey experiment conducted in Lebanon useful for understanding, looking at non-response rates tied to the apparent sponsor of a survey, comparing US/Canada embassy sponsorship with university

Results indicate that Lebanese actively avoid surveys tied to a political entity like an embassy (US or Canadian), but have no issue with surveys given by a US University

Effect is consistent across all groups, but a particularly clear and strong signal when US embassy supposedly giving surveys, showing US viewed relatively more poorly than Canada

This is no surprise, given US-Lebanon history, but important to note that the major breakpoint is interviewer political or non-political affiliation

Results imply that state policy, not broad-spectrum dislike of America/Americans, at play. Lebanese appear to dislike any state intervention in domestic society


Corstange, Daniel and Nikolay Marinov. 2012. "Taking Sides in Other People’s Elections: The Polarizing Effect of Foreign Intervention." American Journal of Political Science 56(3): 655-670. doi:10.1111/j.1540-5907.2012.00583.x.

Foreign interference in elections a widespread problem, but understanding of voter perceptions still lacking, with virtually no prior work or focus on real voters

States intervene in the complex real environment of domestic politics on a routine basis, and there is reason to believe parties that benefit will tend to support from such intervention

Interventions can be divided into process and partisan types, partisan interventions backing a particular group and process interventions focusing on the electoral process itself

Quantitative assessment of survey experiment used to examine issue in Lebanon, where US and Iran both have a long history of interventions in domestic politics

Sunni and Shia groups contest power in Lebanon, with US generally backing Sunni and Iran via Hezbollah backing Shia, and partisan interventions are opposed by group losing out as result

Anti-Americanism not a major factor, and even Shia are accepting of US interventions focusing on process, but are opposed those that boost Sunni fortunes

At the domestic level, perception of intervention thus mediated by type and who benefits, with partisan intervention tending to polarize an electorate


Jamal, Amaney A. and Mark A. Tessler. 2008. "Attitudes in the Arab World." Journal of Democracy 19(1): 97-110. doi:10.1353/jod.2008.0004.

Arab Barometer results show widespread support for democracy in Arab world, but what democracy means differs according to population, some focus on competition and others on economics

Tendency towards gradualism present, preference for slow expansion of democracy, democracy seen as useful and beneficial but its expansion poses risks

Western sources often disparage the potential for democracy in the Arab World, emphasizing purported innate hostility in Arab/Islamic society to democratic rules and processes

Surveys indicate that religiosity is not connected to anti-democratic attitudes, overall tendency in Arab societies to be concerned about consequences of fast democratization

Diversity of view typical, different groups in the same society hold different views about democracy, especially with respect to outcomes for their interests


Jiang, Junyan and Dali L. Yang. 2016. "Lying or Believing? Measuring Preference Falsification From a Political Purge in China." Comparative Political Studies 49(5): 600-634. https://doi.org/10.1177/0010414015626450.

Preference falsification is an issue in studying political dynamics, and measuring it is the basic challenge in surmounting its effects

A major political purge in Shanghai, China, ostensibly combating corruption but likely motivated in part by politics, offered a unique opportunity for conducting a natural experiment

Authors construct two synthetic measures for actual vs. expressed support for crackdown, allowing examination of the gap between the two in a unique context

Apparent support for the Chinese government increased, but actual support decreased, a result robust to numerous validation checks that indicates falsification present

Falsification most intense among vulnerable but information-rich groups, indicating that citizens with access to alternative information understand risk of promoting certain views

Self-reported data widely used in social sciences, but vulnerable to systematic bias if respondents don't tell the truth, and natural experiments can help show the degree to which this is a problem

Wealthiest, best-educated citizens with internet access were the ones who falsified the most, likely explained by their having much to lose if associated with anti-regime sentiment

This result questions theories that assume these types of citizens will drive democratic reform in China, given that their behavior indicates preference for self-preservation


Kirdiş, Esen. 2016. "From Loyal to Hard Opposition: The Political Transformation of the Jordanian Muslim Brotherhood." Politics, Religion & Ideology 17(2-3): 121-142

Jordan's Muslim Brotherhood historically the only major opposition party to regime/Hashemite rule, but mobilization in JMB has not led to liberalization and reform

This has led to JMB shifting focus from acting as loyal opposition to outright regime opponents, evident in discourse analysis applied to JMB discussion of own history

Skocpol argues that states are organizational configurations affecting meaning and method in politics, states control the environment in which actors/groups interact

State shifts to alter the landscape experienced by opposition parties forces adaptation, creating an ongoing cat/mouse dynamic susceptible to major shocks

Internal divisions in party create scope for adaptation via contest between sub-groups, and this process of adaptation has shifted JMB from idealism to realism over time

In states lacking true democracy, realism leads an opposition party to embrace anti-regime positions and become hard opposition, and JMB experience bears this out

But this shift has left JMB structure itself an impediment to further adaptation and better advocacy as opposition becomes more hard/strident/firm 

The key dynamic at play is inclusion/non-inclusion at national and party levels, with Hashemite non-inclusion of JMB leading latter to embrace counter-hegemony


Marinov, Nikolay. 2013. "Voter attitudes when democracy promotion turns partisan: evidence from a survey-experiment in Lebanon." Democratization 20(7): 1297-1321. https://doi.org/10.1080/13510347.2012.690096.

Lebanon 2009 election saw significant outside interference, with the US involved both in the process dimension and backing preferred local parties

Questions for scientists to examine is how voters respond to this interference, this question essential in understanding the durability of democratic institutions themselves

Survey experiment shows preference for process-based interventions, at least among more educated/politically sophisticated Lebanese

Other voters are more focused on support of outsiders for their particular party, with Shias and Christians both opposing US partisan interventions on behalf of Sunnis

American patronage appears more decisive than Iran's, despite latter's long involvement, as its support is consistent, while US is more inconsistently applied

Less educated voters tend to view interventions through partisan lens, with Shia groups overall holding very bleak view of US due to past interventions

Outsiders usually have an agenda, promoting parties and/or process can be part of it, and this agenda/perception of it colors citizen views and impacts behaviors


Tessler, Mark, and Michael Robbins. 2007. “What leads some ordinary Arab men and women to approve of terrorist acts against the United States?” Journal of Conflict Resolution 51(2): 305–328.

Rebel organizations rely on support of populace to survive and continue fighting, and groups using terrorism must be separated from popular support to mitigate the issue

Study focuses on determinants of support for terrorism in populace, with religious/cultural and political/economic arguments typically put forward to explain

Religious/cultural arguments rely on a view that many Arabs are inherent anti-west, and that anti-democratic norms are pervasive throughout Arab society

Political/Economic arguments tend to emphasize the history of US/Western interventions in region, and long-term economic manipulation 

Comparing attitudes in Algeria and Jordan useful as both have high levels of Anti-American/pro-terrorist support, but very different histories and polities

Algerian civil war devastating, but Jordan has been luckier in this regard despite outbreaks of civil conflict, so some potential for Algerians to be reflexively more anti-terrorism

Despite differences, results show little variation in attitude of interest, but particularly important to note that religiosity not shown tied to support for terror or hatred of west

Political-Economic explanations much stronger, with policy actions of western nations like US driving hostility, and in Jordan desire for economic security also plays a role in support for terrorism

Where domestic political institutions are weak and opposition to US policy actions high, support for terrorism against US targets increases

The key here is the view on the US as responsible for the status quo, with a direct attitudinal connection between US policy and support for terror strikes against it 


Tessler, Mark, Amaney Jamal, and Michael Robbins. 2012. “New findings on Arabs and democracy.” Journal of Democracy 23(4): 89-103. http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/jod.2012.0066.

Arab Spring protests across region shared themes of opposition to regimes, putting pressure on them, and Arab Barometer surveys captured variation useful for evaluating future democratization prospect

Comparing Wave 1 and Wave 2, democracy remains widely supported in Arab World despite outcome of Arab Spring, with declining support for religious groups common

Political and economic concerns rank highest in Arab world, tied to perception of social challenges affecting the entire area

Political interest and activity is kept low by regime controls, and there is no real evidence for cultural/religious factors preventing greater political participation

There is a growing consensus on a degree of relative secularism and a focus on democratic processes, with even Islamist parties accepting democracy by and large


Zoubir, Yahia H. and Louisa Aït-hamadouche. 2006. Anti-Americanism in North Africa: Could state relations overcome popular resentment?" The Journal of North African Studies 11(1): 35-54. ttps://doi.org/10.1080/13629380500409842.

Anti-Americanism expresses at two main levels in North Africa, government relationship with the US and public opinion at large

Public opinion is multi-faceted, with opposition to US policy widespread, but also general acceptance of many US norms and products

Governments are forced to actively criticize US policy in order to curry favor with public, but are expected to work with US to guarantee security and economy

Muslims in area tend to perceive D.C. as permanently biased on the Israel-Palestine issue, and there is widespread perception of Jewish interests as setting US policy

Some expressed Anti-Americanism is deeply felt, but for the most part it is US policies in the region that people oppose, and its role in styming domestic reforms

Wars in Iraq and Afghanistan deeply affected Arab opinions, and perceived differently in Arab world than in West, engendering higher distrust of US unilateral action, impunity, and bias

























